 Antonio part: 
Bassanio told him he would make some speed 
Of his return: he answer'd, 'Do not so; 
Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio 
But stay the very riping of the time; 
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me, 
Let it not enter in your mind of love: 
Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts 
To courtship and such fair ostents of love 
As shall conveniently become you there:' 
And even there, his eye being big with tears, 
Turning his face, he put his hand behind him, 

And with affection wondrous sensible 
He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted. 
SALANIO 
I think he only loves the world for him. 
I pray thee, let us go and find him out 
And quicken his embraced heaviness 
With some delight or other. 
SALARINO 
Do we so. 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 2, Scene 8 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 2, Scene 9 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE IX. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
Enter NERISSA with a Servitor 
NERISSA 
Quick, quick, I pray thee; draw the curtain straight: 
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath, 
And comes to his election presently. 
Flourish of cornets. Enter the PRINCE OF ARRAGON, PORTIA, and their trains 
PORTIA 
Behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince: 
If you choose that wherein I am contain'd, 
Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized: 
But if you fail, without more speech, my lord, 
You must be gone from hence immediately. 
ARRAGON 
I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things: 
First, never to unfold to any one 
Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail 
Of the right casket, never in my life 
To woo a maid in way of marriage: Lastly, 
If I do fail in fortune of my choice, 
Immediately to leave you and be gone. 
PORTIA 
To these injunctions every one doth swear 
That comes to hazard for my worthless self. 
ARRAGON 

And so have I address'd me. Fortune now 
To my heart's hope! Gold; silver; and base lead. 
'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.' 
You shall look fairer, ere I give or hazard. 
What says the golden chest? ha! let me see: 
'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire.' 
What many men desire! that 'many' may be meant 
By the fool multitude, that choose by show, 
Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; 
Which pries not to the interior, but, like the martlet, 
Builds in the weather on the outward wall, 
Even in the force and road of casualty. 
I will not choose what many men desire, 
Because I will not jump with common spirits 
And rank me with the barbarous multitudes. 
Why, then to thee, thou silver treasure-house; 
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear: 
'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves:' 
And well said too; for who shall go about 
To cozen fortune and be honourable 
Without the stamp of merit? Let none presume 
To wear an undeserved dignity. 
O, that estates, degrees and offices 
Were not derived corruptly, and that clear honour 
Were purchased by the merit of the wearer! 
How many then should cover that stand bare! 
How many be commanded that command! 
How much low peasantry would then be glean'd 
From the true seed of honour! and how much honour 
Pick'd from the chaff and ruin of the times 
To be new-varnish'd! Well, but to my choice: 
'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves.' 
I will assume desert. Give me a key for this, 
And instantly unlock my fortunes here. 
He opens the silver casket 
PORTIA 
Too long a pause for that which you find there. 
ARRAGON 

What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot, 
Presenting me a schedule! I will read it. 
How much unlike art thou to Portia! 
How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! 
'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.' 
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head? 
Is that my prize? are my deserts no better? 
PORTIA 
To offend, and judge, are distinct offices 
And of opposed natures. 
ARRAGON 
What is here? 
Reads 
The fire seven times tried this: 
Seven times tried that judgment is, 
That did never choose amiss. 
Some there be that shadows kiss; 
Such have but a shadow's bliss: 
There be fools alive, I wis, 
Silver'd o'er; and so was this. 
Take what wife you will to bed, 
I will ever be your head: 
So be gone: you are sped. 
Still more fool I shall appear 
By the time I linger here 
With one fool's head I came to woo, 
But I go away with two. 
Sweet, adieu. I'll keep my oath, 
Patiently to bear my wroth. 
Exeunt Arragon and train 
PORTIA 
Thus hath the candle singed the moth. 

O, these deliberate fools! when they do choose, 
They have the wisdom by their wit to lose. 
NERISSA 
The ancient saying is no heresy, 
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny. 
PORTIA 
Come, draw the curtain, Nerissa. 
Enter a Servant 
Servant 
Where is my lady? 
PORTIA 
Here: what would my lord? 
Servant 
Madam, there is alighted at your gate 
A young Venetian, one that comes before 
To signify the approaching of his lord; 
From whom he bringeth sensible regreets, 
To wit, besides commends and courteous breath, 
Gifts of rich value. Yet I have not seen 
So likely an ambassador of love: 
A day in April never came so sweet, 
To show how costly summer was at hand, 
As this fore-spurrer comes before his lord. 
PORTIA 
No more, I pray thee: I am half afeard 
Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, 
Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him. 
Come, come, Nerissa; for I long to see 

Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly. 
NERISSA 
Bassanio, lord Love, if thy will it be! 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 2, Scene 9 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 1 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE I. Venice. A street. 
Enter SALANIO and SALARINO 
SALANIO 
Now, what news on the Rialto? 
SALARINO 
Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath 
a ship of rich lading wrecked on the narrow seas; 
the Goodwins, I think they call the place; a very 
dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many 
a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip 
Report be an honest woman of her word. 
SALANIO 
I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever 
knapped ginger or made her neighbours believe she 
wept for the death of a third husband. But it is 
true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the 
plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the 
honest Antonio,--O that I had a title good enough 
to keep his name company!-- 
SALARINO 
Come, the full stop. 
SALANIO 
Ha! what sayest thou? Why, the end is, he hath 
lost a ship. 

SALARINO 
I would it might prove the end of his losses. 
SALANIO 
Let me say 'amen' betimes, lest the devil cross my 
prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew. 
Enter SHYLOCK 
How now, Shylock! what news among the merchants? 
SHYLOCK 
You know, none so well, none so well as you, of my 
daughter's flight. 
SALARINO 
That's certain: I, for my part, knew the tailor 
that made the wings she flew withal. 
SALANIO 
And Shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was 
fledged; and then it is the complexion of them all 
to leave the dam. 
SHYLOCK 
She is damned for it. 
SALANIO 
That's certain, if the devil may be her judge. 
SHYLOCK 
My own flesh and blood to rebel! 

SALANIO 
Out upon it, old carrion! rebels it at these years? 
SHYLOCK 
I say, my daughter is my flesh and blood. 
SALARINO 
There is more difference between thy flesh and hers 
than between jet and ivory; more between your bloods 
than there is between red wine and rhenish. But 
tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any 
loss at sea or no? 
SHYLOCK 
There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a 
prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on the 
Rialto; a beggar, that was used to come so smug upon 
the mart; let him look to his bond: he was wont to 
call me usurer; let him look to his bond: he was 
wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him 
look to his bond. 
SALARINO 
Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take 
his flesh: what's that good for? 
SHYLOCK 
To bait fish withal: if it will feed nothing else, 
it will feed my revenge. He hath disgraced me, and 
hindered me half a million; laughed at my losses, 
mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my 
bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine 
enemies; and what's his reason? I am a Jew. Hath 
not a Jew eyes? hath not a Jew hands, organs, 
dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with 
the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject 

to the same diseases, healed by the same means, 
warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer, as 
a Christian is? If you prick us, do we not bleed? 
if you tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison 
us, do we not die? and if you wrong us, shall we not 
revenge? If we are like you in the rest, we will 
resemble you in that. If a Jew wrong a Christian, 
what is his humility? Revenge. If a Christian 
wrong a Jew, what should his sufferance be by 
Christian example? Why, revenge. The villany you 
teach me, I will execute, and it shall go hard but I 
will better the instruction. 
Enter a Servant 
Servant 
Gentlemen, my master Antonio is at his house and 
desires to speak with you both. 
SALARINO 
We have been up and down to seek him. 
Enter TUBAL 
SALANIO 
Here comes another of the tribe: a third cannot be 
matched, unless the devil himself turn Jew. 
Exeunt SALANIO, SALARINO, and Servant 
SHYLOCK 
How now, Tubal! what news from Genoa? hast thou 
found my daughter? 
TUBAL 
I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her. 

SHYLOCK 
Why, there, there, there, there! a diamond gone, 
cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse 
never fell upon our nation till now; I never felt it 
till now: two thousand ducats in that; and other 
precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter 
were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear! 
would she were hearsed at my foot, and the ducats in 
her coffin! No news of them? Why, so: and I know 
not what's spent in the search: why, thou loss upon 
loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to 
find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge: 
nor no in luck stirring but what lights on my 
shoulders; no sighs but of my breathing; no tears 
but of my shedding. 
TUBAL 
Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I 
heard in Genoa,-- 
SHYLOCK 
What, what, what? ill luck, ill luck? 
TUBAL 
Hath an argosy cast away, coming from Tripolis. 
SHYLOCK 
I thank God, I thank God. Is't true, is't true? 
TUBAL 
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wreck. 
SHYLOCK 
I thank thee, good Tubal: good news, good news! 

ha, ha! where? in Genoa? 
TUBAL 
Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, in one 
night fourscore ducats. 
SHYLOCK 
Thou stickest a dagger in me: I shall never see my 
gold again: fourscore ducats at a sitting! 
fourscore ducats! 
TUBAL 
There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my 
company to Venice, that swear he cannot choose but break. 
SHYLOCK 
I am very glad of it: I'll plague him; I'll torture 
him: I am glad of it. 
TUBAL 
One of them showed me a ring that he had of your 
daughter for a monkey. 
SHYLOCK 
Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal: it was my 
turquoise; I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor: 
I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys. 
TUBAL 
But Antonio is certainly undone. 
SHYLOCK 
Nay, that's true, that's very true. Go, Tubal, fee 

me an officer; bespeak him a fortnight before. I 
will have the heart of him, if he forfeit; for, were 
he out of Venice, I can make what merchandise I 
will. Go, go, Tubal, and meet me at our synagogue; 
go, good Tubal; at our synagogue, Tubal. 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 1 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE II. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
Enter BASSANIO, PORTIA, GRATIANO, NERISSA, and Attendants 
PORTIA 
I pray you, tarry: pause a day or two 
Before you hazard; for, in choosing wrong, 
I lose your company: therefore forbear awhile. 
There's something tells me, but it is not love, 
I would not lose you; and you know yourself, 
Hate counsels not in such a quality. 
But lest you should not understand me well,-- 
And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought,-- 
I would detain you here some month or two 
Before you venture for me. I could teach you 
How to choose right, but I am then forsworn; 
So will I never be: so may you miss me; 
But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, 
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes, 
They have o'erlook'd me and divided me; 
One half of me is yours, the other half yours, 
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours, 
And so all yours. O, these naughty times 
Put bars between the owners and their rights! 
And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so, 
Let fortune go to hell for it, not I. 
I speak too long; but 'tis to peize the time, 
To eke it and to draw it out in length, 
To stay you from election. 
BASSANIO 
Let me choose 
For as I am, I live upon the rack. 
PORTIA 

Upon the rack, Bassanio! then confess 
What treason there is mingled with your love. 
BASSANIO 
None but that ugly treason of mistrust, 
Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love: 
There may as well be amity and life 
'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love. 
PORTIA 
Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack, 
Where men enforced do speak anything. 
BASSANIO 
Promise me life, and I'll confess the truth. 
PORTIA 
Well then, confess and live. 
BASSANIO 
'Confess' and 'love' 
Had been the very sum of my confession: 
O happy torment, when my torturer 
Doth teach me answers for deliverance! 
But let me to my fortune and the caskets. 
PORTIA 
Away, then! I am lock'd in one of them: 
If you do love me, you will find me out. 
Nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. 
Let music sound while he doth make his choice; 
Then, if he lose, he makes a swan-like end, 
Fading in music: that the comparison 
May stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream 

And watery death-bed for him. He may win; 
And what is music then? Then music is 
Even as the flourish when true subjects bow 
To a new-crowned monarch: such it is 
As are those dulcet sounds in break of day 
That creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear, 
And summon him to marriage. Now he goes, 
With no less presence, but with much more love, 
Than young Alcides, when he did redeem 
The virgin tribute paid by howling Troy 
To the sea-monster: I stand for sacrifice 
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives, 
With bleared visages, come forth to view 
The issue of the exploit. Go, Hercules! 
Live thou, I live: with much, much more dismay 
I view the fight than thou that makest the fray. 
Music, whilst BASSANIO comments on the caskets to himself 
SONG. 
Tell me where is fancy bred, 
Or in the heart, or in the head? 
How begot, how nourished? 
Reply, reply. 
It is engender'd in the eyes, 
With gazing fed; and fancy dies 
In the cradle where it lies. 
Let us all ring fancy's knell 
I'll begin it,--Ding, dong, bell. 
ALL 
Ding, dong, bell. 
BASSANIO 
So may the outward shows be least themselves: 
The world is still deceived with ornament. 
In law, what plea so tainted and corrupt, 
But, being seasoned with a gracious voice, 
Obscures the show of evil? In religion, 
What damned error, but some sober brow 

Will bless it and approve it with a text, 
Hiding the grossness with fair ornament? 
There is no vice so simple but assumes 
Some mark of virtue on his outward parts: 
How many cowards, whose hearts are all as false 
As stairs of sand, wear yet upon their chins 
The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars; 
Who, inward search'd, have livers white as milk; 
And these assume but valour's excrement 
To render them redoubted! Look on beauty, 
And you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight; 
Which therein works a miracle in nature, 
Making them lightest that wear most of it: 
So are those crisped snaky golden locks 
Which make such wanton gambols with the wind, 
Upon supposed fairness, often known 
To be the dowry of a second head, 
The skull that bred them in the sepulchre. 
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore 
To a most dangerous sea; the beauteous scarf 
Veiling an Indian beauty; in a word, 
The seeming truth which cunning times put on 
To entrap the wisest. Therefore, thou gaudy gold, 
Hard food for Midas, I will none of thee; 
Nor none of thee, thou pale and common drudge 
'Tween man and man: but thou, thou meagre lead, 
Which rather threatenest than dost promise aught, 
Thy paleness moves me more than eloquence; 
And here choose I; joy be the consequence! 
PORTIA 
[Aside] How all the other passions fleet to air, 
As doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, 
And shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! O love, 
Be moderate; allay thy ecstasy, 
In measure rein thy joy; scant this excess. 
I feel too much thy blessing: make it less, 
For fear I surfeit. 
BASSANIO 
What find I here? 

Opening the leaden casket 
Fair Portia's counterfeit! What demi-god 
Hath come so near creation? Move these eyes? 
Or whether, riding on the balls of mine, 
Seem they in motion? Here are sever'd lips, 
Parted with sugar breath: so sweet a bar 
Should sunder such sweet friends. Here in her hairs 
The painter plays the spider and hath woven 
A golden mesh to entrap the hearts of men, 
Faster than gnats in cobwebs; but her eyes,-- 
How could he see to do them? having made one, 
Methinks it should have power to steal both his 
And leave itself unfurnish'd. Yet look, how far 
The substance of my praise doth wrong this shadow 
In underprizing it, so far this shadow 
Doth limp behind the substance. Here's the scroll, 
The continent and summary of my fortune. 
Reads 
You that choose not by the view, 
Chance as fair and choose as true! 
Since this fortune falls to you, 
Be content and seek no new, 
If you be well pleased with this 
And hold your fortune for your bliss, 
Turn you where your lady is 
And claim her with a loving kiss. 
A gentle scroll. Fair lady, by your leave; 
I come by note, to give and to receive. 
Like one of two contending in a prize, 
That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes, 
Hearing applause and universal shout, 
Giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt 
Whether these pearls of praise be his or no; 
So, thrice fair lady, stand I, even so; 
As doubtful whether what I see be true, 
Until confirm'd, sign'd, ratified by you. 
PORTIA 

You see me, Lord Bassanio, where I stand, 
Such as I am: though for myself alone 
I would not be ambitious in my wish, 
To wish myself much better; yet, for you 
I would be trebled twenty times myself; 
A thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich; 
That only to stand high in your account, 
I might in virtue, beauties, livings, friends, 
Exceed account; but the full sum of me 
Is sum of something, which, to term in gross, 
Is an unlesson'd girl, unschool'd, unpractised; 
Happy in this, she is not yet so old 
But she may learn; happier than this, 
She is not bred so dull but she can learn; 
Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit 
Commits itself to yours to be directed, 
As from her lord, her governor, her king. 
Myself and what is mine to you and yours 
Is now converted: but now I was the lord 
Of this fair mansion, master of my servants, 
Queen o'er myself: and even now, but now, 
This house, these servants and this same myself 
Are yours, my lord: I give them with this ring; 
Which when you part from, lose, or give away, 
Let it presage the ruin of your love 
And be my vantage to exclaim on you. 
BASSANIO 
Madam, you have bereft me of all words, 
Only my blood speaks to you in my veins; 
And there is such confusion in my powers, 
As after some oration fairly spoke 
By a beloved prince, there doth appear 
Among the buzzing pleased multitude; 
Where every something, being blent together, 
Turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy, 
Express'd and not express'd. But when this ring 
Parts from this finger, then parts life from hence: 
O, then be bold to say Bassanio's dead! 
NERISSA 

My lord and lady, it is now our time, 
That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper, 
To cry, good joy: good joy, my lord and lady! 
GRATIANO 
My lord Bassanio and my gentle lady, 
I wish you all the joy that you can wish; 
For I am sure you can wish none from me: 
And when your honours mean to solemnize 
The bargain of your faith, I do beseech you, 
Even at that time I may be married too. 
BASSANIO 
With all my heart, so thou canst get a wife. 
GRATIANO 
I thank your lordship, you have got me one. 
My eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours: 
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid; 
You loved, I loved for intermission. 
No more pertains to me, my lord, than you. 
Your fortune stood upon the casket there, 
And so did mine too, as the matter falls; 
For wooing here until I sweat again, 
And sweating until my very roof was dry 
With oaths of love, at last, if promise last, 
I got a promise of this fair one here 
To have her love, provided that your fortune 
Achieved her mistress. 
PORTIA 
Is this true, Nerissa? 
NERISSA 
Madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal. 

BASSANIO 
And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith? 
GRATIANO 
Yes, faith, my lord. 
BASSANIO 
Our feast shall be much honour'd in your marriage. 
GRATIANO 
We'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats. 
NERISSA 
What, and stake down? 
GRATIANO 
No; we shall ne'er win at that sport, and stake down. 
But who comes here? Lorenzo and his infidel? What, 
and my old Venetian friend Salerio? 
Enter LORENZO, JESSICA, and SALERIO, a Messenger from Venice 
BASSANIO 
Lorenzo and Salerio, welcome hither; 
If that the youth of my new interest here 
Have power to bid you welcome. By your leave, 
I bid my very friends and countrymen, 
Sweet Portia, welcome. 
PORTIA 
So do I, my lord: 
They are entirely welcome. 

LORENZO 
I thank your honour. For my part, my lord, 
My purpose was not to have seen you here; 
But meeting with Salerio by the way, 
He did entreat me, past all saying nay, 
To come with him along. 
SALERIO 
I did, my lord; 
And I have reason for it. Signior Antonio 
Commends him to you. 
Gives Bassanio a letter 
BASSANIO 
Ere I ope his letter, 
I pray you, tell me how my good friend doth. 
SALERIO 
Not sick, my lord, unless it be in mind; 
Nor well, unless in mind: his letter there 
Will show you his estate. 
GRATIANO 
Nerissa, cheer yon stranger; bid her welcome. 
Your hand, Salerio: what's the news from Venice? 
How doth that royal merchant, good Antonio? 
I know he will be glad of our success; 
We are the Jasons, we have won the fleece. 
SALERIO 
I would you had won the fleece that he hath lost. 
PORTIA 

There are some shrewd contents in yon same paper, 
That steals the colour from Bassanio's cheek: 
Some dear friend dead; else nothing in the world 
Could turn so much the constitution 
Of any constant man. What, worse and worse! 
With leave, Bassanio: I am half yourself, 
And I must freely have the half of anything 
That this same paper brings you. 
BASSANIO 
O sweet Portia, 
Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words 
That ever blotted paper! Gentle lady, 
When I did first impart my love to you, 
I freely told you, all the wealth I had 
Ran in my veins, I was a gentleman; 
And then I told you true: and yet, dear lady, 
Rating myself at nothing, you shall see 
How much I was a braggart. When I told you 
My state was nothing, I should then have told you 
That I was worse than nothing; for, indeed, 
I have engaged myself to a dear friend, 
Engaged my friend to his mere enemy, 
To feed my means. Here is a letter, lady; 
The paper as the body of my friend, 
And every word in it a gaping wound, 
Issuing life-blood. But is it true, Salerio? 
Have all his ventures fail'd? What, not one hit? 
From Tripolis, from Mexico and England, 
From Lisbon, Barbary and India? 
And not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch 
Of merchant-marring rocks? 
SALERIO 
Not one, my lord. 
Besides, it should appear, that if he had 
The present money to discharge the Jew, 
He would not take it. Never did I know 
A creature, that did bear the shape of man, 
So keen and greedy to confound a man: 
He plies the duke at morning and at night, 

And doth impeach the freedom of the state, 
If they deny him justice: twenty merchants, 
The duke himself, and the magnificoes 
Of greatest port, have all persuaded with him; 
But none can drive him from the envious plea 
Of forfeiture, of justice and his bond. 
JESSICA 
When I was with him I have heard him swear 
To Tubal and to Chus, his countrymen, 
That he would rather have Antonio's flesh 
Than twenty times the value of the sum 
That he did owe him: and I know, my lord, 
If law, authority and power deny not, 
It will go hard with poor Antonio. 
PORTIA 
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble? 
BASSANIO 
The dearest friend to me, the kindest man, 
The best-condition'd and unwearied spirit 
In doing courtesies, and one in whom 
The ancient Roman honour more appears 
Than any that draws breath in Italy. 
PORTIA 
What sum owes he the Jew? 
BASSANIO 
For me three thousand ducats. 
PORTIA 
What, no more? 
Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond; 

Double six thousand, and then treble that, 
Before a friend of this description 
Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault. 
First go with me to church and call me wife, 
And then away to Venice to your friend; 
For never shall you lie by Portia's side 
With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold 
To pay the petty debt twenty times over: 
When it is paid, bring your true friend along. 
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime 
Will live as maids and widows. Come, away! 
For you shall hence upon your wedding-day: 
Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer: 
Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear. 
But let me hear the letter of your friend. 
BASSANIO 
[Reads] Sweet Bassanio, my ships have all 
miscarried, my creditors grow cruel, my estate is 
very low, my bond to the Jew is forfeit; and since 
in paying it, it is impossible I should live, all 
debts are cleared between you and I, if I might but 
see you at my death. Notwithstanding, use your 
pleasure: if your love do not persuade you to come, 
let not my letter. 
PORTIA 
O love, dispatch all business, and be gone! 
BASSANIO 
Since I have your good leave to go away, 
I will make haste: but, till I come again, 
No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay, 
No rest be interposer 'twixt us twain. 
Exeunt 

Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 3 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE III. Venice. A street. 
Enter SHYLOCK, SALARINO, ANTONIO, and Gaoler 
SHYLOCK 
Gaoler, look to him: tell not me of mercy; 
This is the fool that lent out money gratis: 
Gaoler, look to him. 
ANTONIO 
Hear me yet, good Shylock. 
SHYLOCK 
I'll have my bond; speak not against my bond: 
I have sworn an oath that I will have my bond. 
Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause; 
But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs: 
The duke shall grant me justice. I do wonder, 
Thou naughty gaoler, that thou art so fond 
To come abroad with him at his request. 
ANTONIO 
I pray thee, hear me speak. 
SHYLOCK 
I'll have my bond; I will not hear thee speak: 
I'll have my bond; and therefore speak no more. 
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool, 
To shake the head, relent, and sigh, and yield 
To Christian intercessors. Follow not; 
I'll have no speaking: I will have my bond. 

Exit 
SALARINO 
It is the most impenetrable cur 
That ever kept with men. 
ANTONIO 
Let him alone: 
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers. 
He seeks my life; his reason well I know: 
I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures 
Many that have at times made moan to me; 
Therefore he hates me. 
SALARINO 
I am sure the duke 
Will never grant this forfeiture to hold. 
ANTONIO 
The duke cannot deny the course of law: 
For the commodity that strangers have 
With us in Venice, if it be denied, 
Will much impeach the justice of his state; 
Since that the trade and profit of the city 
Consisteth of all nations. Therefore, go: 
These griefs and losses have so bated me, 
That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh 
To-morrow to my bloody creditor. 
Well, gaoler, on. Pray God, Bassanio come 
To see me pay his debt, and then I care not! 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 3 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 4 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE IV. Belmont. A room in PORTIA'S house. 
Enter PORTIA, NERISSA, LORENZO, JESSICA, and BALTHASAR 
LORENZO 
Madam, although I speak it in your presence, 
You have a noble and a true conceit 
Of godlike amity; which appears most strongly 
In bearing thus the absence of your lord. 
But if you knew to whom you show this honour, 
How true a gentleman you send relief, 
How dear a lover of my lord your husband, 
I know you would be prouder of the work 
Than customary bounty can enforce you. 
PORTIA 
I never did repent for doing good, 
Nor shall not now: for in companions 
That do converse and waste the time together, 
Whose souls do bear an equal yoke Of love, 
There must be needs a like proportion 
Of lineaments, of manners and of spirit; 
Which makes me think that this Antonio, 
Being the bosom lover of my lord, 
Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, 
How little is the cost I have bestow'd 
In purchasing the semblance of my soul 
From out the state of hellish misery! 
This comes too near the praising of myself; 
Therefore no more of it: hear other things. 
Lorenzo, I commit into your hands 
The husbandry and manage of my house 
Until my lord's return: for mine own part, 
I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow 
To live in prayer and contemplation, 

Only attended by Nerissa here, 
Until her husband and my lord's return: 
There is a monastery two miles off; 
And there will we abide. I do desire you 
Not to deny this imposition; 
The which my love and some necessity 
Now lays upon you. 
LORENZO 
Madam, with all my heart; 
I shall obey you in all fair commands. 
PORTIA 
My people do already know my mind, 
And will acknowledge you and Jessica 
In place of Lord Bassanio and myself. 
And so farewell, till we shall meet again. 
LORENZO 
Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you! 
JESSICA 
I wish your ladyship all heart's content. 
PORTIA 
I thank you for your wish, and am well pleased 
To wish it back on you: fare you well Jessica. 
Exeunt JESSICA and LORENZO 
Now, Balthasar, 
As I have ever found thee honest-true, 
So let me find thee still. Take this same letter, 
And use thou all the endeavour of a man 
In speed to Padua: see thou render this 
Into my cousin's hand, Doctor Bellario; 
And, look, what notes and garments he doth give thee, 

Bring them, I pray thee, with imagined speed 
Unto the tranect, to the common ferry 
Which trades to Venice. Waste no time in words, 
But get thee gone: I shall be there before thee. 
BALTHASAR 
Madam, I go with all convenient speed. 
Exit 
PORTIA 
Come on, Nerissa; I have work in hand 
That you yet know not of: we'll see our husbands 
Before they think of us. 
NERISSA 
Shall they see us? 
PORTIA 
They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit, 
That they shall think we are accomplished 
With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager, 
When we are both accoutred like young men, 
I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two, 
And wear my dagger with the braver grace, 
And speak between the change of man and boy 
With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps 
Into a manly stride, and speak of frays 
Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, 
How honourable ladies sought my love, 
Which I denying, they fell sick and died; 
I could not do withal; then I'll repent, 
And wish for all that, that I had not killed them; 
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell, 
That men shall swear I have discontinued school 
Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind 
A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks, 
Which I will practise. 

NERISSA 
Why, shall we turn to men? 
PORTIA 
Fie, what a question's that, 
If thou wert near a lewd interpreter! 
But come, I'll tell thee all my whole device 
When I am in my coach, which stays for us 
At the park gate; and therefore haste away, 
For we must measure twenty miles to-day. 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 4 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 5 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE V. The same. A garden. 
Enter LAUNCELOT and JESSICA 
LAUNCELOT 
Yes, truly; for, look you, the sins of the father 
are to be laid upon the children: therefore, I 
promise ye, I fear you. I was always plain with 
you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter: 
therefore be of good cheer, for truly I think you 
are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do 
you any good; and that is but a kind of bastard 
hope neither. 
JESSICA 
And what hope is that, I pray thee? 
LAUNCELOT 
Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you 
not, that you are not the Jew's daughter. 
JESSICA 
That were a kind of bastard hope, indeed: so the 
sins of my mother should be visited upon me. 
LAUNCELOT 
Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and 
mother: thus when I shun Scylla, your father, I 
fall into Charybdis, your mother: well, you are 
gone both ways. 

JESSICA 
I shall be saved by my husband; he hath made me a 
Christian. 
LAUNCELOT 
Truly, the more to blame he: we were Christians 
enow before; e'en as many as could well live, one by 
another. This making Christians will raise the 
price of hogs: if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we 
shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money. 
Enter LORENZO 
JESSICA 
I'll tell my husband, Launcelot, what you say: here he comes. 
LORENZO 
I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if 
you thus get my wife into corners. 
JESSICA 
Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo: Launcelot and I 
are out. He tells me flatly, there is no mercy for 
me in heaven, because I am a Jew's daughter: and he 
says, you are no good member of the commonwealth, 
for in converting Jews to Christians, you raise the 
price of pork. 
LORENZO 
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than 
you can the getting up of the negro's belly: the 
Moor is with child by you, Launcelot. 
LAUNCELOT 

It is much that the Moor should be more than reason: 
but if she be less than an honest woman, she is 
indeed more than I took her for. 
LORENZO 
How every fool can play upon the word! I think the 
best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, 
and discourse grow commendable in none only but 
parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them prepare for dinner. 
LAUNCELOT 
That is done, sir; they have all stomachs. 
LORENZO 
Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! then bid 
them prepare dinner. 
LAUNCELOT 
That is done too, sir; only 'cover' is the word. 
LORENZO 
Will you cover then, sir? 
LAUNCELOT 
Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty. 
LORENZO 
Yet more quarrelling with occasion! Wilt thou show 
the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? I pray 
tree, understand a plain man in his plain meaning: 
go to thy fellows; bid them cover the table, serve 
in the meat, and we will come in to dinner. 
LAUNCELOT 

For the table, sir, it shall be served in; for the 
meat, sir, it shall be covered; for your coming in 
to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and 
conceits shall govern. 
Exit 
LORENZO 
O dear discretion, how his words are suited! 
The fool hath planted in his memory 
An army of good words; and I do know 
A many fools, that stand in better place, 
Garnish'd like him, that for a tricksy word 
Defy the matter. How cheerest thou, Jessica? 
And now, good sweet, say thy opinion, 
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife? 
JESSICA 
Past all expressing. It is very meet 
The Lord Bassanio live an upright life; 
For, having such a blessing in his lady, 
He finds the joys of heaven here on earth; 
And if on earth he do not mean it, then 
In reason he should never come to heaven 
Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match 
And on the wager lay two earthly women, 
And Portia one, there must be something else 
Pawn'd with the other, for the poor rude world 
Hath not her fellow. 
LORENZO 
Even such a husband 
Hast thou of me as she is for a wife. 
JESSICA 
Nay, but ask my opinion too of that. 

LORENZO 
I will anon: first, let us go to dinner. 
JESSICA 
Nay, let me praise you while I have a stomach. 
LORENZO 
No, pray thee, let it serve for table-talk; 
' Then, howso'er thou speak'st, 'mong other things 
I shall digest it. 
JESSICA 
Well, I'll set you forth. 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 3, Scene 5 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 4, Scene 1 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE I. Venice. A court of justice. 
Enter the DUKE, the Magnificoes, ANTONIO, BASSANIO, GRATIANO, SALERIO, and 
others 
DUKE 
What, is Antonio here? 
ANTONIO 
Ready, so please your grace. 
DUKE 
I am sorry for thee: thou art come to answer 
A stony adversary, an inhuman wretch 
uncapable of pity, void and empty 
From any dram of mercy. 
ANTONIO 
I have heard 
Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify 
His rigorous course; but since he stands obdurate 
And that no lawful means can carry me 
Out of his envy's reach, I do oppose 
My patience to his fury, and am arm'd 
To suffer, with a quietness of spirit, 
The very tyranny and rage of his. 
DUKE 
Go one, and call the Jew into the court. 
SALERIO 

He is ready at the door: he comes, my lord. 
Enter SHYLOCK 
DUKE 
Make room, and let him stand before our face. 
Shylock, the world thinks, and I think so too, 
That thou but lead'st this fashion of thy malice 
To the last hour of act; and then 'tis thought 
Thou'lt show thy mercy and remorse more strange 
Than is thy strange apparent cruelty; 
And where thou now exact'st the penalty, 
Which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh, 
Thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture, 
But, touch'd with human gentleness and love, 
Forgive a moiety of the principal; 
Glancing an eye of pity on his losses, 
That have of late so huddled on his back, 
Enow to press a royal merchant down 
And pluck commiseration of his state 
From brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint, 
From stubborn Turks and Tartars, never train'd 
To offices of tender courtesy. 
We all expect a gentle answer, Jew. 
SHYLOCK 
I have possess'd your grace of what I purpose; 
And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn 
To have the due and forfeit of my bond: 
If you deny it, let the danger light 
Upon your charter and your city's freedom. 
You'll ask me, why I rather choose to have 
A weight of carrion flesh than to receive 
Three thousand ducats: I'll not answer that: 
But, say, it is my humour: is it answer'd? 
What if my house be troubled with a rat 
And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats 
To have it baned? What, are you answer'd yet? 
Some men there are love not a gaping pig; 

Some, that are mad if they behold a cat; 
And others, when the bagpipe sings i' the nose, 
Cannot contain their urine: for affection, 
Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood 
Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer: 
As there is no firm reason to be render'd, 
Why he cannot abide a gaping pig; 
Why he, a harmless necessary cat; 
Why he, a woollen bagpipe; but of force 
Must yield to such inevitable shame 
As to offend, himself being offended; 
So can I give no reason, nor I will not, 
More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing 
I bear Antonio, that I follow thus 
A losing suit against him. Are you answer'd? 
BASSANIO 
This is no answer, thou unfeeling man, 
To excuse the current of thy cruelty. 
SHYLOCK 
I am not bound to please thee with my answers. 
BASSANIO 
Do all men kill the things they do not love? 
SHYLOCK 
Hates any man the thing he would not kill? 
BASSANIO 
Every offence is not a hate at first. 
SHYLOCK 
What, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice? 

ANTONIO 
I pray you, think you question with the Jew: 
You may as well go stand upon the beach 
And bid the main flood bate his usual height; 
You may as well use question with the wolf 
Why he hath made the ewe bleat for the lamb; 
You may as well forbid the mountain pines 
To wag their high tops and to make no noise, 
When they are fretten with the gusts of heaven; 
You may as well do anything most hard, 
As seek to soften that--than which what's harder?-- 
His Jewish heart: therefore, I do beseech you, 
Make no more offers, use no farther means, 
But with all brief and plain conveniency 
Let me have judgment and the Jew his will. 
BASSANIO 
For thy three thousand ducats here is six. 
SHYLOCK 
What judgment shall I dread, doing 
Were in six parts and every part a ducat, 
I would not draw them; I would have my bond. 
DUKE 
How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none? 
SHYLOCK 
What judgment shall I dread, doing no wrong? 
You have among you many a purchased slave, 
Which, like your asses and your dogs and mules, 
You use in abject and in slavish parts, 
Because you bought them: shall I say to you, 
Let them be free, marry them to your heirs? 
Why sweat they under burthens? let their beds 
Be made as soft as yours and let their palates 
Be season'd with such viands? You will answer 

'The slaves are ours:' so do I answer you: 
The pound of flesh, which I demand of him, 
Is dearly bought; 'tis mine and I will have it. 
If you deny me, fie upon your law! 
There is no force in the decrees of Venice. 
I stand for judgment: answer; shall I have it? 
DUKE 
Upon my power I may dismiss this court, 
Unless Bellario, a learned doctor, 
Whom I have sent for to determine this, 
Come here to-day. 
SALERIO 
My lord, here stays without 
A messenger with letters from the doctor, 
New come from Padua. 
DUKE 
Bring us the letter; call the messenger. 
BASSANIO 
Good cheer, Antonio! What, man, courage yet! 
The Jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all, 
Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood. 
ANTONIO 
I am a tainted wether of the flock, 
Meetest for death: the weakest kind of fruit 
Drops earliest to the ground; and so let me 
You cannot better be employ'd, Bassanio, 
Than to live still and write mine epitaph. 
Enter NERISSA, dressed like a lawyer's clerk 
DUKE 

Came you from Padua, from Bellario? 
NERISSA 
From both, my lord. Bellario greets your grace. 
Presenting a letter 
BASSANIO 
Why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly? 
SHYLOCK 
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there. 
GRATIANO 
Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew, 
Thou makest thy knife keen; but no metal can, 
No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness 
Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee? 
SHYLOCK 
No, none that thou hast wit enough to make. 
GRATIANO 
O, be thou damn'd, inexecrable dog! 
And for thy life let justice be accused. 
Thou almost makest me waver in my faith 
To hold opinion with Pythagoras, 
That souls of animals infuse themselves 
Into the trunks of men: thy currish spirit 
Govern'd a wolf, who, hang'd for human slaughter, 
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, 
And, whilst thou lay'st in thy unhallow'd dam, 
Infused itself in thee; for thy desires 
Are wolvish, bloody, starved and ravenous. 

SHYLOCK 
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, 
Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud: 
Repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall 
To cureless ruin. I stand here for law. 
DUKE 
This letter from Bellario doth commend 
A young and learned doctor to our court. 
Where is he? 
NERISSA 
He attendeth here hard by, 
To know your answer, whether you'll admit him. 
DUKE 
With all my heart. Some three or four of you 
Go give him courteous conduct to this place. 
Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter. 
Clerk 
[Reads] 
Your grace shall understand that at the receipt of 
your letter I am very sick: but in the instant that 
your messenger came, in loving visitation was with 
me a young doctor of Rome; his name is Balthasar. I 
acquainted him with the cause in controversy between 
the Jew and Antonio the merchant: we turned o'er 
many books together: he is furnished with my 
opinion; which, bettered with his own learning, the 
greatness whereof I cannot enough commend, comes 
with him, at my importunity, to fill up your grace's 
request in my stead. I beseech you, let his lack of 
years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend 
estimation; for I never knew so young a body with so 
old a head. I leave him to your gracious 
acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his 

commendation. 
DUKE 
You hear the learn'd Bellario, what he writes: 
And here, I take it, is the doctor come. 
Enter PORTIA, dressed like a doctor of laws 
Give me your hand. Come you from old Bellario? 
PORTIA 
I did, my lord. 
DUKE 
You are welcome: take your place. 
Are you acquainted with the difference 
That holds this present question in the court? 
PORTIA 
I am informed thoroughly of the cause. 
Which is the merchant here, and which the Jew? 
DUKE 
Antonio and old Shylock, both stand forth. 
PORTIA 
Is your name Shylock? 
SHYLOCK 
Shylock is my name. 
PORTIA 
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow; 

Yet in such rule that the Venetian law 
Cannot impugn you as you do proceed. 
You stand within his danger, do you not? 
ANTONIO 
Ay, so he says. 
PORTIA 
Do you confess the bond? 
ANTONIO 
I do. 
PORTIA 
Then must the Jew be merciful. 
SHYLOCK 
On what compulsion must I? tell me that. 
PORTIA 
The quality of mercy is not strain'd, 
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven 
Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest; 
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes: 
'Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes 
The throned monarch better than his crown; 
His sceptre shows the force of temporal power, 
The attribute to awe and majesty, 
Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings; 
But mercy is above this sceptred sway; 
It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, 
It is an attribute to God himself; 
And earthly power doth then show likest God's 
When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, 
Though justice be thy plea, consider this, 
That, in the course of justice, none of us 

Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy; 
And that same prayer doth teach us all to render 
The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much 
To mitigate the justice of thy plea; 
Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice 
Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there. 
SHYLOCK 
My deeds upon my head! I crave the law, 
The penalty and forfeit of my bond. 
PORTIA 
Is he not able to discharge the money? 
BASSANIO 
Yes, here I tender it for him in the court; 
Yea, twice the sum: if that will not suffice, 
I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er, 
On forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart: 
If this will not suffice, it must appear 
That malice bears down truth. And I beseech you, 
Wrest once the law to your authority: 
To do a great right, do a little wrong, 
And curb this cruel devil of his will. 
PORTIA 
It must not be; there is no power in Venice 
Can alter a decree established: 
'Twill be recorded for a precedent, 
And many an error by the same example 
Will rush into the state: it cannot be. 
SHYLOCK 
A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel! 
O wise young judge, how I do honour thee! 
PORTIA 

I pray you, let me look upon the bond. 
SHYLOCK 
Here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is. 
PORTIA 
Shylock, there's thrice thy money offer'd thee. 
SHYLOCK 
An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven: 
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul? 
No, not for Venice. 
PORTIA 
Why, this bond is forfeit; 
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim 
A pound of flesh, to be by him cut off 
Nearest the merchant's heart. Be merciful: 
Take thrice thy money; bid me tear the bond. 
SHYLOCK 
When it is paid according to the tenor. 
It doth appear you are a worthy judge; 
You know the law, your exposition 
Hath been most sound: I charge you by the law, 
Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar, 
Proceed to judgment: by my soul I swear 
There is no power in the tongue of man 
To alter me: I stay here on my bond. 
ANTONIO 
Most heartily I do beseech the court 
To give the judgment. 

PORTIA 
Why then, thus it is: 
You must prepare your bosom for his knife. 
SHYLOCK 
O noble judge! O excellent young man! 
PORTIA 
For the intent and purpose of the law 
Hath full relation to the penalty, 
Which here appeareth due upon the bond. 
SHYLOCK 
'Tis very true: O wise and upright judge! 
How much more elder art thou than thy looks! 
PORTIA 
Therefore lay bare your bosom. 
SHYLOCK 
Ay, his breast: 
So says the bond: doth it not, noble judge? 
'Nearest his heart:' those are the very words. 
PORTIA 
It is so. Are there balance here to weigh 
The flesh? 
SHYLOCK 
I have them ready. 
PORTIA 

Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge, 
To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death. 
SHYLOCK 
Is it so nominated in the bond? 
PORTIA 
It is not so express'd: but what of that? 
'Twere good you do so much for charity. 
SHYLOCK 
I cannot find it; 'tis not in the bond. 
PORTIA 
You, merchant, have you any thing to say? 
ANTONIO 
But little: I am arm'd and well prepared. 
Give me your hand, Bassanio: fare you well! 
Grieve not that I am fallen to this for you; 
For herein Fortune shows herself more kind 
Than is her custom: it is still her use 
To let the wretched man outlive his wealth, 
To view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow 
An age of poverty; from which lingering penance 
Of such misery doth she cut me off. 
Commend me to your honourable wife: 
Tell her the process of Antonio's end; 
Say how I loved you, speak me fair in death; 
And, when the tale is told, bid her be judge 
Whether Bassanio had not once a love. 
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend, 
And he repents not that he pays your debt; 
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough, 
I'll pay it presently with all my heart. 
BASSANIO 

Antonio, I am married to a wife 
Which is as dear to me as life itself; 
But life itself, my wife, and all the world, 
Are not with me esteem'd above thy life: 
I would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all 
Here to this devil, to deliver you. 
PORTIA 
Your wife would give you little thanks for that, 
If she were by, to hear you make the offer. 
GRATIANO 
I have a wife, whom, I protest, I love: 
I would she were in heaven, so she could 
Entreat some power to change this currish Jew. 
NERISSA 
'Tis well you offer it behind her back; 
The wish would make else an unquiet house. 
SHYLOCK 
These be the Christian husbands. I have a daughter; 
Would any of the stock of Barrabas 
Had been her husband rather than a Christian! 
Aside 
We trifle time: I pray thee, pursue sentence. 
PORTIA 
A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine: 
The court awards it, and the law doth give it. 
SHYLOCK 

Most rightful judge! 
PORTIA 
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast: 
The law allows it, and the court awards it. 
SHYLOCK 
Most learned judge! A sentence! Come, prepare! 
PORTIA 
Tarry a little; there is something else. 
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood; 
The words expressly are 'a pound of flesh:' 
Take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh; 
But, in the cutting it, if thou dost shed 
One drop of Christian blood, thy lands and goods 
Are, by the laws of Venice, confiscate 
Unto the state of Venice. 
GRATIANO 
O upright judge! Mark, Jew: O learned judge! 
SHYLOCK 
Is that the law? 
PORTIA 
Thyself shalt see the act: 
For, as thou urgest justice, be assured 
Thou shalt have justice, more than thou desirest. 
GRATIANO 
O learned judge! Mark, Jew: a learned judge! 
SHYLOCK 

I take this offer, then; pay the bond thrice 
And let the Christian go. 
BASSANIO 
Here is the money. 
PORTIA 
Soft! 
The Jew shall have all justice; soft! no haste: 
He shall have nothing but the penalty. 
GRATIANO 
O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge! 
PORTIA 
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. 
Shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more 
But just a pound of flesh: if thou cut'st more 
Or less than a just pound, be it but so much 
As makes it light or heavy in the substance, 
Or the division of the twentieth part 
Of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn 
But in the estimation of a hair, 
Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate. 
GRATIANO 
A second Daniel, a Daniel, Jew! 
Now, infidel, I have you on the hip. 
PORTIA 
Why doth the Jew pause? take thy forfeiture. 
SHYLOCK 
Give me my principal, and let me go. 

BASSANIO 
I have it ready for thee; here it is. 
PORTIA 
He hath refused it in the open court: 
He shall have merely justice and his bond. 
GRATIANO 
A Daniel, still say I, a second Daniel! 
I thank thee, Jew, for teaching me that word. 
SHYLOCK 
Shall I not have barely my principal? 
PORTIA 
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture, 
To be so taken at thy peril, Jew. 
SHYLOCK 
Why, then the devil give him good of it! 
I'll stay no longer question. 
PORTIA 
Tarry, Jew: 
The law hath yet another hold on you. 
It is enacted in the laws of Venice, 
If it be proved against an alien 
That by direct or indirect attempts 
He seek the life of any citizen, 
The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive 
Shall seize one half his goods; the other half 
Comes to the privy coffer of the state; 
And the offender's life lies in the mercy 

Of the duke only, 'gainst all other voice. 
In which predicament, I say, thou stand'st; 
For it appears, by manifest proceeding, 
That indirectly and directly too 
Thou hast contrived against the very life 
Of the defendant; and thou hast incurr'd 
The danger formerly by me rehearsed. 
Down therefore and beg mercy of the duke. 
GRATIANO 
Beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself: 
And yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, 
Thou hast not left the value of a cord; 
Therefore thou must be hang'd at the state's charge. 
DUKE 
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirits, 
I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it: 
For half thy wealth, it is Antonio's; 
The other half comes to the general state, 
Which humbleness may drive unto a fine. 
PORTIA 
Ay, for the state, not for Antonio. 
SHYLOCK 
Nay, take my life and all; pardon not that: 
You take my house when you do take the prop 
That doth sustain my house; you take my life 
When you do take the means whereby I live. 
PORTIA 
What mercy can you render him, Antonio? 
GRATIANO 
A halter gratis; nothing else, for God's sake. 

ANTONIO 
So please my lord the duke and all the court 
To quit the fine for one half of his goods, 
I am content; so he will let me have 
The other half in use, to render it, 
Upon his death, unto the gentleman 
That lately stole his daughter: 
Two things provided more, that, for this favour, 
He presently become a Christian; 
The other, that he do record a gift, 
Here in the court, of all he dies possess'd, 
Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter. 
DUKE 
He shall do this, or else I do recant 
The pardon that I late pronounced here. 
PORTIA 
Art thou contented, Jew? what dost thou say? 
SHYLOCK 
I am content. 
PORTIA 
Clerk, draw a deed of gift. 
SHYLOCK 
I pray you, give me leave to go from hence; 
I am not well: send the deed after me, 
And I will sign it. 
DUKE 
Get thee gone, but do it. 

GRATIANO 
In christening shalt thou have two god-fathers: 
Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more, 
To bring thee to the gallows, not the font. 
Exit SHYLOCK 
DUKE 
Sir, I entreat you home with me to dinner. 
PORTIA 
I humbly do desire your grace of pardon: 
I must away this night toward Padua, 
And it is meet I presently set forth. 
DUKE 
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not. 
Antonio, gratify this gentleman, 
For, in my mind, you are much bound to him. 
Exeunt Duke and his train 
BASSANIO 
Most worthy gentleman, I and my friend 
Have by your wisdom been this day acquitted 
Of grievous penalties; in lieu whereof, 
Three thousand ducats, due unto the Jew, 
We freely cope your courteous pains withal. 
ANTONIO 
And stand indebted, over and above, 
In love and service to you evermore. 
PORTIA 

He is well paid that is well satisfied; 
And I, delivering you, am satisfied 
And therein do account myself well paid: 
My mind was never yet more mercenary. 
I pray you, know me when we meet again: 
I wish you well, and so I take my leave. 
BASSANIO 
Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further: 
Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute, 
Not as a fee: grant me two things, I pray you, 
Not to deny me, and to pardon me. 
PORTIA 
You press me far, and therefore I will yield. 
To ANTONIO 
Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake; 
To BASSANIO 
And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you: 
Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more; 
And you in love shall not deny me this. 
BASSANIO 
This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle! 
I will not shame myself to give you this. 
PORTIA 
I will have nothing else but only this; 
And now methinks I have a mind to it. 
BASSANIO 
There's more depends on this than on the value. 

The dearest ring in Venice will I give you, 
And find it out by proclamation: 
Only for this, I pray you, pardon me. 
PORTIA 
I see, sir, you are liberal in offers 
You taught me first to beg; and now methinks 
You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd. 
BASSANIO 
Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife; 
And when she put it on, she made me vow 
That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it. 
PORTIA 
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts. 
An if your wife be not a mad-woman, 
And know how well I have deserved the ring, 
She would not hold out enemy for ever, 
For giving it to me. Well, peace be with you! 
Exeunt Portia and Nerissa 
ANTONIO 
My Lord Bassanio, let him have the ring: 
Let his deservings and my love withal 
Be valued against your wife's commandment. 
BASSANIO 
Go, Gratiano, run and overtake him; 
Give him the ring, and bring him, if thou canst, 
Unto Antonio's house: away! make haste. 
Exit Gratiano 
Come, you and I will thither presently; 

And in the morning early will we both 
Fly toward Belmont: come, Antonio. 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 4, Scene 1 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 4, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE II. The same. A street. 
Enter PORTIA and NERISSA 
PORTIA 
Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed 
And let him sign it: we'll away to-night 
And be a day before our husbands home: 
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo. 
Enter GRATIANO 
GRATIANO 
Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en 
My Lord Bassanio upon more advice 
Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat 
Your company at dinner. 
PORTIA 
That cannot be: 
His ring I do accept most thankfully: 
And so, I pray you, tell him: furthermore, 
I pray you, show my youth old Shylock's house. 
GRATIANO 
That will I do. 
NERISSA 
Sir, I would speak with you. 
Aside to PORTIA 

I'll see if I can get my husband's ring, 
Which I did make him swear to keep for ever. 
PORTIA 
[Aside to NERISSA] Thou mayst, I warrant. 
We shall have old swearing 
That they did give the rings away to men; 
But we'll outface them, and outswear them too. 
Aloud 
Away! make haste: thou knowist where I will tarry. 
NERISSA 
Come, good sir, will you show me to this house? 
Exeunt 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 4, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 

The Merchant of Venice 
Shakespeare homepage | Merchant of Venice | Act 5, Scene 1 
Previous scene 
SCENE I. Belmont. Avenue to PORTIA'S house. 
Enter LORENZO and JESSICA 
LORENZO 
The moon shines bright: in such a night as this, 
When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees 
And they did make no noise, in such a night 
Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls 
And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents, 
Where Cressid lay that night. 
JESSICA 
In such a night 
Did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew 
And saw the lion's shadow ere himself 
And ran dismay'd away. 
LORENZO 
In such a night 
Stood Dido with a willow in her hand 
Upon the wild sea banks and waft her love 
To come again to Carthage. 
JESSICA 
In such a night 
Medea gather'd the enchanted herbs 
That did renew old AEson. 
LORENZO 
In such a night 

Did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew 
And with an unthrift love did run from Venice 
As far as Belmont. 
JESSICA 
In such a night 
Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well, 
Stealing her soul with many vows of faith 
And ne'er a true one. 
LORENZO 
In such a night 
Did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew, 
Slander her love, and he forgave it her. 
JESSICA 
I would out-night you, did no body come; 
But, hark, I hear the footing of a man. 
Enter STEPHANO 
LORENZO 
Who comes so fast in silence of the night? 
STEPHANO 
A friend. 
LORENZO 
A friend! what friend? your name, I pray you, friend? 
STEPHANO 
Stephano is my name; and I bring word 
My mistress will before the break of day 
Be here at Belmont; she doth stray about 

By holy crosses, where she kneels and prays 
For happy wedlock hours. 
LORENZO 
Who comes with her? 
STEPHANO 
None but a holy hermit and her maid. 
I pray you, is my master yet return'd? 
LORENZO 
He is not, nor we have not heard from him. 
But go we in, I pray thee, Jessica, 
And ceremoniously let us prepare 
Some welcome for the mistress of the house. 
Enter LAUNCELOT 
LAUNCELOT 
Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola! 
LORENZO 
Who calls? 
LAUNCELOT 
Sola! did you see Master Lorenzo? 
Master Lorenzo, sola, sola! 
LORENZO 
Leave hollaing, man: here. 
LAUNCELOT 
Sola! where? where? 

LORENZO 
Here. 
LAUNCELOT 
Tell him there's a post come from my master, with 
his horn full of good news: my master will be here 
ere morning. 
Exit 
LORENZO 
Sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming. 
And yet no matter: why should we go in? 
My friend Stephano, signify, I pray you, 
Within the house, your mistress is at hand; 
And bring your music forth into the air. 
Exit Stephano 
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! 
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music 
Creep in our ears: soft stillness and the night 
Become the touches of sweet harmony. 
Sit, Jessica. Look how the floor of heaven 
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold: 
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st 
But in his motion like an angel sings, 
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins; 
Such harmony is in immortal souls; 
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it. 
Enter Musicians 
Come, ho! and wake Diana with a hymn! 
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress' ear, 
And draw her home with music. 

Music 
JESSICA 
I am never merry when I hear sweet music. 
LORENZO 
The reason is, your spirits are attentive: 
For do but note a wild and wanton herd, 
Or race of youthful and unhandled colts, 
Fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, 
Which is the hot condition of their blood; 
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, 
Or any air of music touch their ears, 
You shall perceive them make a mutual stand, 
Their savage eyes turn'd to a modest gaze 
By the sweet power of music: therefore the poet 
Did feign that Orpheus drew trees, stones and floods; 
Since nought so stockish, hard and full of rage, 
But music for the time doth change his nature. 
The man that hath no music in himself, 
Nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, 
Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoils; 
The motions of his spirit are dull as night 
And his affections dark as Erebus: 
Let no such man be trusted. Mark the music. 
Enter PORTIA and NERISSA 
PORTIA 
That light we see is burning in my hall. 
How far that little candle throws his beams! 
So shines a good deed in a naughty world. 
NERISSA 
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle. 
PORTIA 

So doth the greater glory dim the less: 
A substitute shines brightly as a king 
Unto the king be by, and then his state 
Empties itself, as doth an inland brook 
Into the main of waters. Music! hark! 
NERISSA 
It is your music, madam, of the house. 
PORTIA 
Nothing is good, I see, without respect: 
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day. 
NERISSA 
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam. 
PORTIA 
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark, 
When neither is attended, and I think 
The nightingale, if she should sing by day, 
When every goose is cackling, would be thought 
No better a musician than the wren. 
How many things by season season'd are 
To their right praise and true perfection! 
Peace, ho! the moon sleeps with Endymion 
And would not be awaked. 
Music ceases 
LORENZO 
That is the voice, 
Or I am much deceived, of Portia. 
PORTIA 
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo, 

By the bad voice. 
LORENZO 
Dear lady, welcome home. 
PORTIA 
We have been praying for our husbands' healths, 
Which speed, we hope, the better for our words. 
Are they return'd? 
LORENZO 
Madam, they are not yet; 
But there is come a messenger before, 
To signify their coming. 
PORTIA 
Go in, Nerissa; 
Give order to my servants that they take 
No note at all of our being absent hence; 
Nor you, Lorenzo; Jessica, nor you. 
A tucket sounds 
LORENZO 
Your husband is at hand; I hear his trumpet: 
We are no tell-tales, madam; fear you not. 
PORTIA 
This night methinks is but the daylight sick; 
It looks a little paler: 'tis a day, 
Such as the day is when the sun is hid. 
Enter BASSANIO, ANTONIO, GRATIANO, and their followers 
BASSANIO 

We should hold day with the Antipodes, 
If you would walk in absence of the sun. 
PORTIA 
Let me give light, but let me not be light; 
For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, 
And never be Bassanio so for me: 
But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord. 
BASSANIO 
I thank you, madam. Give welcome to my friend. 
This is the man, this is Antonio, 
To whom I am so infinitely bound. 
PORTIA 
You should in all sense be much bound to him. 
For, as I hear, he was much bound for you. 
ANTONIO 
No more than I am well acquitted of. 
PORTIA 
Sir, you are very welcome to our house: 
It must appear in other ways than words, 
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy. 
GRATIANO 
[To NERISSA] By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong; 
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk: 
Would he were gelt that had it, for my part, 
Since you do take it, love, so much at heart. 
PORTIA 
A quarrel, ho, already! what's the matter? 

GRATIANO 
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring 
That she did give me, whose posy was 
For all the world like cutler's poetry 
Upon a knife, 'Love me, and leave me not.' 
NERISSA 
What talk you of the posy or the value? 
You swore to me, when I did give it you, 
That you would wear it till your hour of death 
And that it should lie with you in your grave: 
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, 
You should have been respective and have kept it. 
Gave it a judge's clerk! no, God's my judge, 
The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it. 
GRATIANO 
He will, an if he live to be a man. 
NERISSA 
Ay, if a woman live to be a man. 
GRATIANO 
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth, 
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy, 
No higher than thyself; the judge's clerk, 
A prating boy, that begg'd it as a fee: 
I could not for my heart deny it him. 
PORTIA 
You were to blame, I must be plain with you, 
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift: 
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger 
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh. 
I gave my love a ring and made him swear 

Never to part with it; and here he stands; 
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it 
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth 
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano, 
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief: 
An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it. 
BASSANIO 
[Aside] Why, I were best to cut my left hand off 
And swear I lost the ring defending it. 
GRATIANO 
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away 
Unto the judge that begg'd it and indeed 
Deserved it too; and then the boy, his clerk, 
That took some pains in writing, he begg'd mine; 
And neither man nor master would take aught 
But the two rings. 
PORTIA 
What ring gave you my lord? 
Not that, I hope, which you received of me. 
BASSANIO 
If I could add a lie unto a fault, 
I would deny it; but you see my finger 
Hath not the ring upon it; it is gone. 
PORTIA 
Even so void is your false heart of truth. 
By heaven, I will ne'er come in your bed 
Until I see the ring. 
NERISSA 
Nor I in yours 

Till I again see mine. 
BASSANIO 
Sweet Portia, 
If you did know to whom I gave the ring, 
If you did know for whom I gave the ring 
And would conceive for what I gave the ring 
And how unwillingly I left the ring, 
When nought would be accepted but the ring, 
You would abate the strength of your displeasure. 
PORTIA 
If you had known the virtue of the ring, 
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring, 
Or your own honour to contain the ring, 
You would not then have parted with the ring. 
What man is there so much unreasonable, 
If you had pleased to have defended it 
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty 
To urge the thing held as a ceremony? 
Nerissa teaches me what to believe: 
I'll die for't but some woman had the ring. 
BASSANIO 
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul, 
No woman had it, but a civil doctor, 
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me 
And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him 
And suffer'd him to go displeased away; 
Even he that did uphold the very life 
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady? 
I was enforced to send it after him; 
I was beset with shame and courtesy; 
My honour would not let ingratitude 
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady; 
For, by these blessed candles of the night, 
Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd 
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor. 

PORTIA 
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house: 
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved, 
And that which you did swear to keep for me, 
I will become as liberal as you; 
I'll not deny him any thing I have, 
No, not my body nor my husband's bed: 
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it: 
Lie not a night from home; watch me like Argus: 
If you do not, if I be left alone, 
Now, by mine honour, which is yet mine own, 
I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow. 
NERISSA 
And I his clerk; therefore be well advised 
How you do leave me to mine own protection. 
GRATIANO 
Well, do you so; let not me take him, then; 
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen. 
ANTONIO 
I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels. 
PORTIA 
Sir, grieve not you; you are welcome notwithstanding. 
BASSANIO 
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong; 
And, in the hearing of these many friends, 
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes, 
Wherein I see myself-- 
PORTIA 

Mark you but that! 
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself; 
In each eye, one: swear by your double self, 
And there's an oath of credit. 
BASSANIO 
Nay, but hear me: 
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear 
I never more will break an oath with thee. 
ANTONIO 
I once did lend my body for his wealth; 
Which, but for him that had your husband's ring, 
Had quite miscarried: I dare be bound again, 
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord 
Will never more break faith advisedly. 
PORTIA 
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this 
And bid him keep it better than the other. 
ANTONIO 
Here, Lord Bassanio; swear to keep this ring. 
BASSANIO 
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor! 
PORTIA 
I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio; 
For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me. 
NERISSA 
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano; 
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk, 

In lieu of this last night did lie with me. 
GRATIANO 
Why, this is like the mending of highways 
In summer, where the ways are fair enough: 
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it? 
PORTIA 
Speak not so grossly. You are all amazed: 
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure; 
It comes from Padua, from Bellario: 
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor, 
Nerissa there her clerk: Lorenzo here 
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you 
And even but now return'd; I have not yet 
Enter'd my house. Antonio, you are welcome; 
And I have better news in store for you 
Than you expect: unseal this letter soon; 
There you shall find three of your argosies 
Are richly come to harbour suddenly: 
You shall not know by what strange accident 
I chanced on this letter. 
ANTONIO 
I am dumb. 
BASSANIO 
Were you the doctor and I knew you not? 
GRATIANO 
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold? 
NERISSA 
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it, 
Unless he live until he be a man. 

BASSANIO 
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bed-fellow: 
When I am absent, then lie with my wife. 
ANTONIO 
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living; 
For here I read for certain that my ships 
Are safely come to road. 
PORTIA 
How now, Lorenzo! 
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you. 
NERISSA 
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee. 
There do I give to you and Jessica, 
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift, 
After his death, of all he dies possess'd of. 
LORENZO 
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way 
Of starved people. 
PORTIA 
It is almost morning, 
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied 
Of these events at full. Let us go in; 
And charge us there upon inter'gatories, 
And we will answer all things faithfully. 
GRATIANO 
Let it be so: the first inter'gatory 
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is, 
Whether till the next night she had rather stay, 

Or go to bed now, being two hours to day: 
But were the day come, I should wish it dark, 
That I were couching with the doctor's clerk. 
Well, while I live I'll fear no other thing 
So sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring. 
Exeunt 

A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream 
Entire play in one page 
Act 1, Scene 1: Athens. The palace of THESEUS. 
Act 1, Scene 2: Athens. QUINCE'S house. 
Act 2, Scene 1: A wood near Athens. 
Act 2, Scene 2: Another part of the wood. 
Act 3, Scene 1: The wood. TITANIA lying asleep. 
Act 3, Scene 2: Another part of the wood. 
Act 4, Scene 1: The same. LYSANDER, DEMETRIUS, HELENA, and HERMIA 
Act 4, Scene 2: Athens. QUINCE'S house. 
Act 5, Scene 1: Athens. The palace of THESEUS. 

A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream | Act 1, Scene 1 
Next scene 
SCENE I. Athens. The palace of THESEUS. 
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and Attendants 
THESEUS 
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour 
Draws on apace; four happy days bring in 
Another moon: but, O, methinks, how slow 
This old moon wanes! she lingers my desires, 
Like to a step-dame or a dowager 
Long withering out a young man revenue. 
HIPPOLYTA 
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night; 
Four nights will quickly dream away the time; 
And then the moon, like to a silver bow 
New-bent in heaven, shall behold the night 
Of our solemnities. 
THESEUS 
Go, Philostrate, 
Stir up the Athenian youth to merriments; 
Awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth; 
Turn melancholy forth to funerals; 
The pale companion is not for our pomp. 
Exit PHILOSTRATE 
Hippolyta, I woo'd thee with my sword, 
And won thy love, doing thee injuries; 
But I will wed thee in another key, 
With pomp, with triumph and with revelling. 

Enter EGEUS, HERMIA, LYSANDER, and DEMETRIUS 
EGEUS 
Happy be Theseus, our renowned duke! 
THESEUS 
Thanks, good Egeus: what's the news with thee? 
EGEUS 
Full of vexation come I, with complaint 
Against my child, my daughter Hermia. 
Stand forth, Demetrius. My noble lord, 
This man hath my consent to marry her. 
Stand forth, Lysander: and my gracious duke, 
This man hath bewitch'd the bosom of my child; 
Thou, thou, Lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, 
And interchanged love-tokens with my child: 
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung, 
With feigning voice verses of feigning love, 
And stolen the impression of her fantasy 
With bracelets of thy hair, rings, gawds, conceits, 
Knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers 
Of strong prevailment in unharden'd youth: 
With cunning hast thou filch'd my daughter's heart, 
Turn'd her obedience, which is due to me, 
To stubborn harshness: and, my gracious duke, 
Be it so she; will not here before your grace 
Consent to marry with Demetrius, 
I beg the ancient privilege of Athens, 
As she is mine, I may dispose of her: 
Which shall be either to this gentleman 
Or to her death, according to our law 
Immediately provided in that case. 
THESEUS 
What say you, Hermia? be advised fair maid: 
To you your father should be as a god; 
One that composed your beauties, yea, and one 

To whom you are but as a form in wax 
By him imprinted and within his power 
To leave the figure or disfigure it. 
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman. 
HERMIA 
So is Lysander. 
THESEUS 
In himself he is; 
But in this kind, wanting your father's voice, 
The other must be held the worthier. 
HERMIA 
I would my father look'd but with my eyes. 
THESEUS 
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look. 
HERMIA 
I do entreat your grace to pardon me. 
I know not by what power I am made bold, 
Nor how it may concern my modesty, 
In such a presence here to plead my thoughts; 
But I beseech your grace that I may know 
The worst that may befall me in this case, 
If I refuse to wed Demetrius. 
THESEUS 
Either to die the death or to abjure 
For ever the society of men. 
Therefore, fair Hermia, question your desires; 
Know of your youth, examine well your blood, 
Whether, if you yield not to your father's choice, 
You can endure the livery of a nun, 
For aye to be in shady cloister mew'd, 

To live a barren sister all your life, 
Chanting faint hymns to the cold fruitless moon. 
Thrice-blessed they that master so their blood, 
To undergo such maiden pilgrimage; 
But earthlier happy is the rose distill'd, 
Than that which withering on the virgin thorn 
Grows, lives and dies in single blessedness. 
HERMIA 
So will I grow, so live, so die, my lord, 
Ere I will my virgin patent up 
Unto his lordship, whose unwished yoke 
My soul consents not to give sovereignty. 
THESEUS 
Take time to pause; and, by the nest new moon-- 
The sealing-day betwixt my love and me, 
For everlasting bond of fellowship-- 
Upon that day either prepare to die 
For disobedience to your father's will, 
Or else to wed Demetrius, as he would; 
Or on Diana's altar to protest 
For aye austerity and single life. 
DEMETRIUS 
Relent, sweet Hermia: and, Lysander, yield 
Thy crazed title to my certain right. 
LYSANDER 
You have her father's love, Demetrius; 
Let me have Hermia's: do you marry him. 
EGEUS 
Scornful Lysander! true, he hath my love, 
And what is mine my love shall render him. 
And she is mine, and all my right of her 
I do estate unto Demetrius. 

LYSANDER 
I am, my lord, as well derived as he, 
As well possess'd; my love is more than his; 
My fortunes every way as fairly rank'd, 
If not with vantage, as Demetrius'; 
And, which is more than all these boasts can be, 
I am beloved of beauteous Hermia: 
Why should not I then prosecute my right? 
Demetrius, I'll avouch it to his head, 
Made love to Nedar's daughter, Helena, 
And won her soul; and she, sweet lady, dotes, 
Devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry, 
Upon this spotted and inconstant man. 
THESEUS 
I must confess that I have heard so much, 
And with Demetrius thought to have spoke thereof; 
But, being over-full of self-affairs, 
My mind did lose it. But, Demetrius, come; 
And come, Egeus; you shall go with me, 
I have some private schooling for you both. 
For you, fair Hermia, look you arm yourself 
To fit your fancies to your father's will; 
Or else the law of Athens yields you up-- 
Which by no means we may extenuate-- 
To death, or to a vow of single life. 
Come, my Hippolyta: what cheer, my love? 
Demetrius and Egeus, go along: 
I must employ you in some business 
Against our nuptial and confer with you 
Of something nearly that concerns yourselves. 
EGEUS 
With duty and desire we follow you. 
Exeunt all but LYSANDER and HERMIA 
LYSANDER 

How now, my love! why is your cheek so pale? 
How chance the roses there do fade so fast? 
HERMIA 
Belike for want of rain, which I could well 
Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes. 
LYSANDER 
Ay me! for aught that I could ever read, 
Could ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run smooth; 
But, either it was different in blood,-- 
HERMIA 
O cross! too high to be enthrall'd to low. 
LYSANDER 
Or else misgraffed in respect of years,-- 
HERMIA 
O spite! too old to be engaged to young. 
LYSANDER 
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends,-- 
HERMIA 
O hell! to choose love by another's eyes. 
LYSANDER 
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice, 
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, 
Making it momentany as a sound, 

Swift as a shadow, short as any dream; 
Brief as the lightning in the collied night, 
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth, 
And ere a man hath power to say 'Behold!' 
The jaws of darkness do devour it up: 
So quick bright things come to confusion. 
HERMIA 
If then true lovers have been ever cross'd, 
It stands as an edict in destiny: 
Then let us teach our trial patience, 
Because it is a customary cross, 
As due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs, 
Wishes and tears, poor fancy's followers. 
LYSANDER 
A good persuasion: therefore, hear me, Hermia. 
I have a widow aunt, a dowager 
Of great revenue, and she hath no child: 
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues; 
And she respects me as her only son. 
There, gentle Hermia, may I marry thee; 
And to that place the sharp Athenian law 
Cannot pursue us. If thou lovest me then, 
Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night; 
And in the wood, a league without the town, 
Where I did meet thee once with Helena, 
To do observance to a morn of May, 
There will I stay for thee. 
HERMIA 
My good Lysander! 
I swear to thee, by Cupid's strongest bow, 
By his best arrow with the golden head, 
By the simplicity of Venus' doves, 
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, 
And by that fire which burn'd the Carthage queen, 
When the false Troyan under sail was seen, 
By all the vows that ever men have broke, 

In number more than ever women spoke, 
In that same place thou hast appointed me, 
To-morrow truly will I meet with thee. 
LYSANDER 
Keep promise, love. Look, here comes Helena. 
Enter HELENA 
HERMIA 
God speed fair Helena! whither away? 
HELENA 
Call you me fair? that fair again unsay. 
Demetrius loves your fair: O happy fair! 
Your eyes are lode-stars; and your tongue's sweet air 
More tuneable than lark to shepherd's ear, 
When wheat is green, when hawthorn buds appear. 
Sickness is catching: O, were favour so, 
Yours would I catch, fair Hermia, ere I go; 
My ear should catch your voice, my eye your eye, 
My tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. 
Were the world mine, Demetrius being bated, 
The rest I'd give to be to you translated. 
O, teach me how you look, and with what art 
You sway the motion of Demetrius' heart. 
HERMIA 
I frown upon him, yet he loves me still. 
HELENA 
O that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill! 
HERMIA 
I give him curses, yet he gives me love. 

HELENA 
O that my prayers could such affection move! 
HERMIA 
The more I hate, the more he follows me. 
HELENA 
The more I love, the more he hateth me. 
HERMIA 
His folly, Helena, is no fault of mine. 
HELENA 
None, but your beauty: would that fault were mine! 
HERMIA 
Take comfort: he no more shall see my face; 
Lysander and myself will fly this place. 
Before the time I did Lysander see, 
Seem'd Athens as a paradise to me: 
O, then, what graces in my love do dwell, 
That he hath turn'd a heaven unto a hell! 
LYSANDER 
Helen, to you our minds we will unfold: 
To-morrow night, when Phoebe doth behold 
Her silver visage in the watery glass, 
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass, 
A time that lovers' flights doth still conceal, 
Through Athens' gates have we devised to steal. 
HERMIA 
And in the wood, where often you and I 

Upon faint primrose-beds were wont to lie, 
Emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet, 
There my Lysander and myself shall meet; 
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes, 
To seek new friends and stranger companies. 
Farewell, sweet playfellow: pray thou for us; 
And good luck grant thee thy Demetrius! 
Keep word, Lysander: we must starve our sight 
From lovers' food till morrow deep midnight. 
LYSANDER 
I will, my Hermia. 
Exit HERMIA 
Helena, adieu: 
As you on him, Demetrius dote on you! 
Exit 
HELENA 
How happy some o'er other some can be! 
Through Athens I am thought as fair as she. 
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so; 
He will not know what all but he do know: 
And as he errs, doting on Hermia's eyes, 
So I, admiring of his qualities: 
Things base and vile, folding no quantity, 
Love can transpose to form and dignity: 
Love looks not with the eyes, but with the mind; 
And therefore is wing'd Cupid painted blind: 
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgement taste; 
Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste: 
And therefore is Love said to be a child, 
Because in choice he is so oft beguiled. 
As waggish boys in game themselves forswear, 
So the boy Love is perjured every where: 
For ere Demetrius look'd on Hermia's eyne, 
He hail'd down oaths that he was only mine; 
And when this hail some heat from Hermia felt, 

So he dissolved, and showers of oaths did melt. 
I will go tell him of fair Hermia's flight: 
Then to the wood will he to-morrow night 
Pursue her; and for this intelligence 
If I have thanks, it is a dear expense: 
But herein mean I to enrich my pain, 
To have his sight thither and back again. 
Exit 
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream | Act 1, Scene 1 
Next scene 

A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream | Act 1, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE II. Athens. QUINCE'S house. 
Enter QUINCE, SNUG, BOTTOM, FLUTE, SNOUT, and STARVELING 
QUINCE 
Is all our company here? 
BOTTOM 
You were best to call them generally, man by man, 
according to the scrip. 
QUINCE 
Here is the scroll of every man's name, which is 
thought fit, through all Athens, to play in our 
interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his 
wedding-day at night. 
BOTTOM 
First, good Peter Quince, say what the play treats 
on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow 
to a point. 
QUINCE 
Marry, our play is, The most lamentable comedy, and 
most cruel death of Pyramus and Thisby. 
BOTTOM 
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a 
merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your 
actors by the scroll. Masters, spread yourselves. 

QUINCE 
Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom, the weaver. 
BOTTOM 
Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed. 
QUINCE 
You, Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus. 
BOTTOM 
What is Pyramus? a lover, or a tyrant? 
QUINCE 
A lover, that kills himself most gallant for love. 
BOTTOM 
That will ask some tears in the true performing of 
it: if I do it, let the audience look to their 
eyes; I will move storms, I will condole in some 
measure. To the rest: yet my chief humour is for a 
tyrant: I could play Ercles rarely, or a part to 
tear a cat in, to make all split. 
The raging rocks 
And shivering shocks 
Shall break the locks 
Of prison gates; 
And Phibbus' car 
Shall shine from far 
And make and mar 
The foolish Fates. 
This was lofty! Now name the rest of the players. 
This is Ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein; a lover is 
more condoling. 
QUINCE 

Francis Flute, the bellows-mender. 
FLUTE 
Here, Peter Quince. 
QUINCE 
Flute, you must take Thisby on you. 
FLUTE 
What is Thisby? a wandering knight? 
QUINCE 
It is the lady that Pyramus must love. 
FLUTE 
Nay, faith, let me not play a woman; I have a beard coming. 
QUINCE 
That's all one: you shall play it in a mask, and 
you may speak as small as you will. 
BOTTOM 
An I may hide my face, let me play Thisby too, I'll 
speak in a monstrous little voice. 'Thisne, 
Thisne;' 'Ah, Pyramus, lover dear! thy Thisby dear, 
and lady dear!' 
QUINCE 
No, no; you must play Pyramus: and, Flute, you Thisby. 
BOTTOM 
Well, proceed. 

QUINCE 
Robin Starveling, the tailor. 
STARVELING 
Here, Peter Quince. 
QUINCE 
Robin Starveling, you must play Thisby's mother. 
Tom Snout, the tinker. 
SNOUT 
Here, Peter Quince. 
QUINCE 
You, Pyramus' father: myself, Thisby's father: 
Snug, the joiner; you, the lion's part: and, I 
hope, here is a play fitted. 
SNUG 
Have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it 
be, give it me, for I am slow of study. 
QUINCE 
You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring. 
BOTTOM 
Let me play the lion too: I will roar, that I will 
do any man's heart good to hear me; I will roar, 
that I will make the duke say 'Let him roar again, 
let him roar again.' 
QUINCE 

An you should do it too terribly, you would fright 
the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek; 
and that were enough to hang us all. 
ALL 
That would hang us, every mother's son. 
BOTTOM 
I grant you, friends, if that you should fright the 
ladies out of their wits, they would have no more 
discretion but to hang us: but I will aggravate my 
voice so that I will roar you as gently as any 
sucking dove; I will roar you an 'twere any 
nightingale. 
QUINCE 
You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a 
sweet-faced man; a proper man, as one shall see in a 
summer's day; a most lovely gentleman-like man: 
therefore you must needs play Pyramus. 
BOTTOM 
Well, I will undertake it. What beard were I best 
to play it in? 
QUINCE 
Why, what you will. 
BOTTOM 
I will discharge it in either your straw-colour 
beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain 
beard, or your French-crown-colour beard, your 
perfect yellow. 

QUINCE 
Some of your French crowns have no hair at all, and 
then you will play bare-faced. But, masters, here 
are your parts: and I am to entreat you, request 
you and desire you, to con them by to-morrow night; 
and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the 
town, by moonlight; there will we rehearse, for if 
we meet in the city, we shall be dogged with 
company, and our devices known. In the meantime I 
will draw a bill of properties, such as our play 
wants. I pray you, fail me not. 
BOTTOM 
We will meet; and there we may rehearse most 
obscenely and courageously. Take pains; be perfect: adieu. 
QUINCE 
At the duke's oak we meet. 
BOTTOM 
Enough; hold or cut bow-strings. 
Exeunt
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream | Act 1, Scene 2 
Previous scene | Next scene 

A Midsummer Night's Dream 
Shakespeare homepage | Midsummer Night's Dream | Act 2, Scene 1 
Previous scene | Next scene 
SCENE I. A wood near Athens. 
Enter, from opposite sides, a Fairy, and PUCK 
PUCK 
How now, spirit! whither wander you? 
Fairy 
Over hill, over dale, 
Thorough bush, thorough brier, 
Over park, over pale, 
Thorough flood, thorough fire, 
I do wander everywhere, 
Swifter than the moon's sphere; 
And I serve the fairy queen, 
To dew her orbs upon the green. 
The cowslips tall her pensioners be: 
In their gold coats spots you see; 
Those be rubies, fairy favours, 
In those freckles live their savours: 
I must go seek some dewdrops here 
And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. 
Farewell, thou lob of spirits; I'll be gone: 
Our queen and all our elves come here anon. 
PUCK 
The king doth keep his revels here to-night: 
Take heed the queen come not within his sight; 
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath, 
Because that she as her attendant hath 
A lovely boy, stolen from an Indian king; 
She never had so sweet a changeling; 
And jealous Oberon would have the child 

Knight of his train, to trace the forests wild; 
But she perforce withholds the loved boy, 
Crowns him with flowers and makes him all her joy: 
And now they never meet in grove or green, 
By fountain clear, or spangled starlight sheen, 
But, they do square, that all their elves for fear 
Creep into acorn-cups and hide them there. 
Fairy 
Either I mistake your shape and making quite, 
Or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite 
Call'd Robin Goodfellow: are not you he 
That frights the maidens of the villagery; 
Skim milk, and sometimes labour in the quern 
And bootless make the breathless housewife churn; 
And sometime make the drink to bear no barm; 
Mislead night-wanderers, laughing at their harm? 
Those that Hobgoblin call you and sweet Puck, 
You do their work, and they shall have good luck: 
Are not you he? 
PUCK 
Thou speak'st aright; 
I am that merry wanderer of the night. 
I jest to Oberon and make him smile 
When I a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, 
Neighing in likeness of a filly foal: 
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl, 
In very likeness of a roasted crab, 
And when she drinks, against her lips I bob 
And on her wither'd dewlap pour the ale. 
The wisest aunt, telling the saddest tale, 
Sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me; 
Then slip I from her bum, down topples she, 
And 'tailor' cries, and falls into a cough; 
And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, 
And waxen in their mirth and neeze and swear 
A merrier hour was never wasted there. 
But, room, fairy! here comes Oberon. 

Fairy 
And here my mistress. Would that he were gone! 
Enter, from one side, OBERON, with his train; from the other, TITANIA, with hers 
OBERON 
Ill met by moonlight, proud Titania. 
TITANIA 
What, jealous Oberon! Fairies, skip hence: 
I have forsworn his bed and company. 
OBERON 
Tarry, rash wanton: am not I thy lord? 
TITANIA 
Then I must be thy lady: but I know 
When thou hast stolen away from fairy land, 
And in the shape of Corin sat all day, 
Playing on pipes of corn and versing love 
To amorous Phillida. Why art thou here, 
Come from the farthest Steppe of India? 
But that, forsooth, the bouncing Amazon, 
Your buskin'd mistress and your warrior love, 
To Theseus must be wedded, and you come 
To give their bed joy and prosperity. 
OBERON 
How canst thou thus for shame, Titania, 
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta, 
Knowing I know thy love to Theseus? 
Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night 
From Perigenia, whom he ravished? 
And make him with fair AEgle break his faith, 
With Ariadne and Antiopa? 

TITANIA 
These are the forgeries of jealousy: 
And never, since the middle summer's spring, 
Met we on hill, in dale, forest or mead, 
By paved fountain or by rushy brook, 
Or in the beached margent of the sea, 
To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, 
But with thy brawls thou hast disturb'd our sport. 
Therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, 
As in revenge, have suck'd up from the sea 
Contagious fogs; which falling in the land 
Have every pelting river made so proud 
That they have overborne their continents: 
The ox hath therefore stretch'd his yoke in vain, 
The ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn 
Hath rotted ere his youth attain'd a beard; 
The fold stands empty in the drowned field, 
And crows are fatted with the murrion flock; 
The nine men's morris is fill'd up with mud, 
And the quaint mazes in the wanton green 
For lack of tread are undistinguishable: 
The human mortals want their winter here; 
No night is now with hymn or carol blest: 
Therefore the moon, the governess of floods, 
Pale in her anger, washes all the air, 
That rheumatic diseases do abound: 
And thorough this distemperature we see 
The seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts 
Far in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, 
And on old Hiems' thin and icy crown 
An odorous chaplet of sweet summer buds 
Is, as in mockery, set: the spring, the summer, 
The childing autumn, angry winter, change 
Their wonted liveries, and the mazed world, 
By their increase, now knows not which is which: 
And this same progeny of evils comes 
From our debate, from our dissension; 
We are their parents and original. 
OBERON 

Do you amend it then; it lies in you: 
Why should Titania cross her Oberon? 
I do but beg a little changeling boy, 
To be my henchman. 
TITANIA 
Set your heart at rest: 
The fairy land buys not the child of me. 
His mother was a votaress of my order: 
And, in the spiced Indian air, by night, 
Full often hath she gossip'd by my side, 
And sat with me on Neptune's yellow sands, 
Marking the embarked traders on the flood, 
When we have laugh'd to see the sails conceive 
And grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; 
Which she, with pretty and with swimming gait 
Following,--her womb then rich with my young squire,-- 
Would imitate, and sail upon the land, 
To fetch me trifles, and return again, 
As from a voyage, rich with merchandise. 
But she, being mortal, of that boy did die; 
And for her sake do I rear up her boy, 
And for her sake I will not part with him. 
OBERON 
How long within this wood intend you stay? 
TITANIA 
Perchance till after Theseus' wedding-day. 
If you will patiently dance in our round 
And see our moonlight revels, go with us; 
If not, shun me, and I will spare your haunts. 
OBERON 
Give me that boy, and I will go with thee. 
TITANIA 

Not for thy fairy kingdom. Fairies, away! 
We shall chide downright, if I longer stay. 
Exit TITANIA with her train 
OBERON 
Well, go thy way: thou shalt not from this grove 
Till I torment thee for this injury. 
My gentle Puck, come hither. Thou rememberest 
Since once I sat upon a promontory, 
And heard a mermaid on a dolphin's back 
Uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath 
That the rude sea grew civil at her song 
And certain stars shot madly from their spheres, 
To hear the sea-maid's music. 
PUCK 
I remember. 
OBERON 
That very time I saw, but thou couldst not, 
Flying between the cold moon and the earth, 
Cupid all arm'd: a certain aim he took 
At a fair vestal throned by the west, 
And loosed his love-shaft smartly from his bow, 
As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts; 
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft 
Quench'd in the chaste beams of the watery moon, 
And the imperial votaress passed on, 
In maiden meditation, fancy-free. 
Yet mark'd I where the bolt of Cupid fell: 
It fell upon a little western flower, 
Before milk-white, now purple with love's wound, 
And maidens call it love-in-idleness. 
Fetch me that flower; the herb I shew'd thee once: 
The juice of it on sleeping eye-lids laid 
Will make or man or woman mad